docs: proposed TRG 7.09 for repository deprecation (#1045)
eclipse-tractusx/eclipse-tractusx.github.io: docs/release/trg-7/trg-7-09.md

## Description

Deprecation applies to repositories of type `product`. This information is maintained in the repository metafile (see [TRG 2.05](../trg-2/trg-2-5.md)). Deprecation of a repository means that **the repository is being archived**, i.e. set to status "Public Archive" on Github. It's still accessible from within the project, so that it could be revived. Please refer to [this list for examples of archived repositories within Eclipse Tractus-X](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/?q=&type=archived&language=&sort=).

Additionally the helm charts and container images are still available and no information about the deprecation is passed to the user.

### Criteria for Deprecation

Committers consider the following criteria to propose deprecation of a repository:

> 1. The repository does not comply with the Tractus-X Releases Guidelines (TRG's) and/or the guidelines set by the Eclipse Foundation (i.e. Security, Intellectual Property, etc.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The repository does not comply with the Eclipse Tractus-X Releases Guidelines (TRG's) and/or the guidelines set by the Eclipse Foundation (i.e. Security, Intellectual Property, etc.)
```

In case of repositories belonging to a [Product](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/community/products):
2. The product of the repository has not been released within the *past year's major release cycle* **\***.
3. The standards used by the product have been changed in a major version within the *past year's major release cycle* **\***.

**\*** The *past year's major release cycle* is the time span between the breaking change releases YY.06 e.g., 24.05 till 24.05.

### Deprecation Process

To ensure the communities awareness the following process is used at least per major release planning:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[1: Prepare list of unmaintained repositories] --> B[2-1: Draft critical issue for committer meeting]
    B --> C[2-2: Inform Eclipse Tractus-X community]
    C --> D[3: 2 week period: Comment on issue for criteria discussion]
    D --> E[4-1: Committer meeting: Discuss list]
    E --> F[4-2: Send email to mailing list]

>     F --> G[5: Open Planning: Communicate deprecation proposal during Open Planning]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

>     G --> H{6: Action taken?}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    G --> H{6: Action taken within 4 weeks?}
```

    H -->|No| I[End of Release: Deprecate repository]
    H -->|Yes| J[Plan Update of repository]
    J --> K[Create issue in .eclipsefdn]
```

> 1. The committers prepare a list of unmaintained product repositories (**criteria 1**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The committers prepare a list of unmaintained repositories.
```

> 2. The committers inform the Eclipse Tractus-X community via the [mailing list](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/docs/oss/how-to-contribute/#dev-mailinglist). This is done by an issue with checkboxes listing all these repositories (find the issue template [below](#issue-template-for-deprecation-list)). Additionally a critical issue is drafted on the [board for the committer meeting](https://github.com/orgs/eclipse-tractusx/projects/61/views/6) in at least 2 full weeks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The committers inform the Eclipse Tractus-X community via the [dev mailing list](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/docs/oss/how-to-contribute/#dev-mailinglist). This is done by an issue with checkboxes listing all these repositories (find the issue template [below](#issue-template-for-deprecation-list)). Additionally a critical issue is drafted on the [board for the committer meeting](https://github.com/orgs/eclipse-tractusx/projects/61/views/6) in at least 2 full weeks.
```

Author: done

> 3. 2 weeks period: The committers comment the issue regarding which repositories are subject to **criteria 1** and **criteria 2**. Also if **Criteria 2** does not apply, deprecation may still be possible due to security concerns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. 2 weeks period: The committers comment the issue regarding which repositories are confronted with the [deprecation criteria](#criteria-for-deprecation).
```

Author: done

> 4. Committer meeting: The committers discuss the list and check the boxes in the issue. A Mail is sent out to the Eclipse Tractus-X mailing list. This list is splitted into platform products (e.g. Tractus-X EDC) and use case products (e.g. PURIS). See a template below.

Author: done

> 5. During the [Open Planning](https://catenax-ev.github.io/docs/next/working-model/release-management/planning/tx-release-planning-days) the deprecation proposal is communicated again.
> 6. If no action is taken, during the Release of the major version, the project leads will decide for the deprecation of the given repository and communicate accordingly with the Catena-X Association's release management or the specific organization responsible for the repository.
> 7. In case the repository got deprecated, and there is again maintainace or develop capacity, the following procedure **MUST** be followed [Repository Reactivation Process] by a committer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. If no action is taken within additional **4 weeks** the project leads will proceed with the deprecation of the given repositories and communicate accordingly on the dev mailing list.
6. In case the repository got deprecated, and there is again maintenance or develop capacity, the following procedure **MUST** be followed [Repository Reactivation Process](repository-reactivation-process) by a committer.
```

Author: done

### Issue Template for Deprecation List

``` markdown
# Deprecation List

> The following repositories fulfill at least **criteria 1** so that deprectation has been proposed with this issue following [TRG 7.09](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/docs/release/trg-7/trg-7-09).

Author: checked spelling of fulfill. It's really with two l. Thanks for paying that much attention on typos!

> Dear @eclipse-tractusx/automotive-tractusx-committers walk through the following list and comment which of the repositories shall be checked. The list will be walked through as a critical topic in the committer meeting in two weeks.

Author: done

- [ ] sample repo link 1
- [ ] sample repo link 2
```

### Mail Template for Deprecation

``` markdown

> Dear Tractus-X Community,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dear Eclipse Tractus-X Community,
```

Author: done

Following repositories are proposed to be subject to deprecation with the upcoming release following [TRG 7.09](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/docs/release/trg-7/trg-7-09).

**Platform Products (CRITICAL)**:
- link to repository 1

**Use Case Products**:
- link to repository 2

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

**Supporting repository**:
- link to repository 3
```

> **Call to Action**: Please discuss within your company e.g., with your central Catena-X responsibles, whether you run into an issue. We highly encourage the companies to at least find resources for the **Platform Products** to maintain an open-source data space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Call to Action**: Please discuss within your company e.g., with your Catena-X responsibles, whether you run into an issue by the deprecation. We highly encourage the companies to at least find resources for the **Network Service Products** to maintain an open source data space.
```

Author: done

```

## Reactivation Guidelines

Your repository got deprecated? No worries, follow the following steps to get it back on its feet:

### Repository Reactivation Criteria

In case a repository you are maintaining or want to maintain got deprecated after all the [Criteria for Deprecation](#criteria-for-deprecation) are fulfilled, and the [Deprecation Process](#deprecation-process) finalized, the following criteria **MUST** be fulfilled to reactivate your repository:

> 1. The committer and requestor has capacity to resolve the security vulnerabilities and assure that the repository will comply to the latest TRGs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The committer and requestor has capacity to resolve the security vulnerabilities and assure that the repository will comply and keep up to date TRGs.
```

Author: done but slightly different

2. Capacity to maintain the repository is available.
3. A solid reason is provided to reactivate the repository.

### Repository Reactivation Process

```mermaid
flowchart TD

>     A[1: Requestor creates an issue in the sig-infra repository following a template] --> B[2: Requestors sendd an email to the tractusx-dev mailing list informing of reponsible committer, issue id and reason for reactivation]

Author: done

    B --> C[3: Requestor informs the community in the office hour] 
    C --> D{Reactivation Criteria Fulfilled?}
    D --> |NO| E[4: Project Lead closes the issue in Github]
    D --> |YES| F[4: Project Lead opens issue in .eclipsefdn]
    F --> G[5:Once reactivated, the Project Lead announces it in the mailing list]
    G --> H[6: The Issue in sig-infra is closed]
```

1. The requestor **MUST** create an issue in the [sig-infra](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/sig-infra) repository following the template [below](#issue-template-for-reactivation).

> 2. The requestor **MUST** announce the repository reactivation proposal via an email to the [tractusx-dev](https://accounts.eclipse.org/mailing-list/tractusx-dev) mailing list mentioning the `issueId`, the `reason/motivation`. A`responsible committer` **MUST** be announced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The requestor **MUST** announce the repository reactivation proposal on the [tractusx-dev](https://accounts.eclipse.org/mailing-list/tractusx-dev) mailing list mentioning the `issue Id`, the `reason/motivation`. A `responsible committer` **MUST** be announced.
```

Author: done

3. The requestor **MUST** inform the community within the Office Hour about the petition.
4. A project lead will open a issue at the [.eclipsefdn](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/.eclipsefdn) requesting the reactivation of the repository.

> 5. Once the respository is reactivated, the project lead sends a mail to the [tractusx-dev](https://accounts.eclipse.org/mailing-list/tractusx-dev) mailing list announcing the reactivation.

Author: done

6. The project lead closes the issue in [sig-infra](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/sig-infra).

### Issue Template for Reactivation

```markdown
Title: Request for repository [<REPOSITORY_NAME>] reactivation 
Content:
## Context

**Requester**: @a-contributor-or-committer-github-user
**Responsible Committer**: @a-committer-github-user

**Respository to reactivate**: <repository_link>

### Reason
<!-- Add here your reason, please include the motivation and details to ease the project leads/committer review -->

## Acknowledgments

- [ ] I have checked and verified that the repository fulfills the [Reactivation Guidelines](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/docs/release/trg-7/trg-7-09)

> - [ ] I have emailed the mailing list announcing the committer assigned to the repository, providing a reasonable reason for the repository reactivation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] I have emailed the mailing list announcing the committer assigned to the repository, providing a reasonable motivation for the repository reactivation.
```

---

> title: TRG 7.09 - Deprecation of Unmaintained Product Repositories

Reviewer: I'd write the TRG not specifically for Product Repositories but in general for Repositories
```suggestion
title: TRG 7.09 - Deprecation of Unmaintained Repositories
```

---

| Status | Created     | Post-History                          |
|--------|-------------|---------------------------------------|
| Draft  | 02-Oct-2024 | Initial draft                         |

## Why

> Eclipse Tractus-X is an open source project governed by the Eclipse Foundation and its Committers. Beside the role participating in maintaining the code base, within Eclipse Tractus-X the group of committers also acts as the project's security team. They have access to the tab "Security" and may see the vulnerabilities detected by the tooling set up in [TRGs 8](../trg-8/trg-8-01.md). As this group of committers is responsible for the whole project and has limited resources, projects that don't receive any updates for a given time period will be deprecated. This is a "value-for-money" decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Eclipse Tractus-X is an open source project governed by the Eclipse Foundation and its Committers. Besides the role participating in maintaining the code base, committers are responsible for its security and adherence to the Tractus-X Releases Guideslines (TRG's) as well as the guidelines set by the Eclipse Foundation. As this group of committers is responsible for the whole project and has limited resources, repositories that are not maintained for a given time period will be deprecated.
```

## Description

> Deprecation applies to repositories of type `product`. This information is maintained in the repository metafile (see [TRG 2.05](../trg-2/trg-2-5.md)).Deprecation of a repository means that **the repository is beeing archived**. It's still accessible from within the project, so that it could be revived. Please refer to [this list for examples of archived repositories within Eclipse Tractus-X](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/?q=&type=archived&language=&sort=).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Deprecation applies to repositories of type `product`. This information is maintained in the repository metafile (see [TRG 2.05](../trg-2/trg-2-5.md)). Deprecation of a repository means that **the repository is being archived**, i.e. set to status "Public Archive" on Github. It's still accessible from within the project, so that it could be revived. Please refer to [this list for examples of archived repositories within Eclipse Tractus-X](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/?q=&type=archived&language=&sort=).
```

> Deprecation applies to repositories of type `product`. This information is maintained in the repository metafile (see [TRG 2.05](../trg-2/trg-2-5.md)).Deprecation of a repository means that **the repository is beeing archived**. It's still accessible from within the project, so that it could be revived. Please refer to [this list for examples of archived repositories within Eclipse Tractus-X](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/?q=&type=archived&language=&sort=).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deprecation of a repository means that **the repository is being archived**. It's still accessible from within the project, so that it could be revived. Please refer to [this list for examples of archived repositories within Eclipse Tractus-X](https://github.com/eclipse-tractusx/?q=&type=archived&language=&sort=).
```

Author: done

Additionally the helm charts and container images are still available and no information about the deprecation is passed to the user.

### Criteria for Deprecation

Committers consider the following criteria to propose deprecation of a repository:

> 1. The product of the repository has not been released within the *past year's major release cycle* **\***.
> 2. The standards used by the product have been changed in a major version within the *past year's major release cycle* **\***.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The repository does not comply with the Tractus-X Releases Guidelines (TRG's) and/or the guidelines set by the Eclipse Foundation (i.e. Security, Intellectual Property, etc.)

In case of repositories belonging to a [Product](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/community/products):
2. The product of the repository has not been released within the *past year's major release cycle* **\***.
3. The standards used by the product have been changed in a major version within the *past year's major release cycle* **\***.
```

**\*** The *past year's major release cycle* is the time span between the breaking change releases YY.06 e.g., 24.05 till 24.05.

> ### Process

Author: done

To ensure the communities awareness the following process is used at least per major release planning:

```mermaid
graph TD
    A[1: Prepare list of unmaintained repositories] --> B[2-1 Inform Eclipse Tractus-X community]

>     B --> C[2-2: Draft critical issue for committer meeting]

Author: switched

    C --> D[3: 2 week period: Comment on issue for criteria discussion]
    D --> E[4-1: Committer meeting: Discuss list]

>     E --> F[4-2: Send email to mailing list]

Reviewer 2: Isn't this already covered by step 2?

Author: My idea was like: make the committers and the community aware of the issue. Wait for a grace period (at least one meeting in between) and then inform community "these are subject to deprecation"

I really want to emphasize, that this also somehow should be aligned best to the release cycle as it makes most sense to make persons prior to planning aware of this. One might also consider to trigger the evaluation always in the `.03` releases.

Reviewer 2: The problem with the dependency to releases (or open plannings) is that that'll extend the grace period to multiple months in the worst case. Do we want that?

    F --> G[5: Open Planning: Communicate deprecation proposal during Open Planning]
    G --> H{6: Action taken?}
    H -->|No| I[End of Release: Deprecate repository]

>     H -->|Yes| J[Plan Update of repository]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    H -->|Yes| J[Plan Update of repository]
    J -->K[Create issue in .eclipsefdn]
```

```

1. The committers prepare a list of unmaintained product repositories (**criteria 1**).

> 2. The committers inform the Eclipse Tractus-X community and the Eclipse Tractus-X community lead before the [feature proposal](https://catenax-ev.github.io/docs/next/working-model/release-management/planning/tx-feature-proposal-creation-approval) via the mailing list. This is done by an issue with checkboxes listing all these repositories (find the issue template below). Additionally a critical issue is drafted on the [board for the committer meeting](https://github.com/orgs/eclipse-tractusx/projects/61/views/6) in at least 2 full weeks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The committers inform the Eclipse Tractus-X community via the [mailing list](https://eclipse-tractusx.github.io/docs/oss/how-to-contribute/#dev-mailinglist). This is done by an issue with checkboxes listing all these repositories (find the issue template below). Additionally a critical issue is drafted on the [board for the committer meeting](https://github.com/orgs/eclipse-tractusx/projects/61/views/6) in at least 2 full weeks.
```
